The Joe Rogan experience.
I've been reading that you are having some great success with your machine.
Finally. It's, uh, everything's up and running. Last time we talked,
you had yet to implement it actually out in the wild. And uh,
now you explain to us what happened. You had some bumps in the beginning, right?
Yes.
Yeah. So it's been quite a, quite a few years finally, something's happening.
Um, so we, uh,
we launched our first ocean system from San Francisco in September of last
year and we,
we took it out and roughly two months later we fit,
we figured that first of all, it wasn't catching plastics.
So what we saw was that the system was moving at roughly the same speed as the
plastics. Maybe you just take one step back the idea and how, how it works.
So it's of course we have this great Pacific garbage patch between here and
Hawaii, twice the size of Texas, a hundred million kilos of plastic,
doesn't go away by itself. And the idea was to,
to have this artificial coastline that is driven by the forces of the ocean,
we put it in there and the plastic naturally accumulates against it and kind of
stays in there.
So we can then periodically get it out because the big challenge is that,
although there's a lot of plastic, it's, it's spread out over this vast area.
So we first have to concentrate it before we can take it out,
because if you were to simply troll the ocean for plastic, with boats and nets,
it would just take forever. Really? So, so the idea was to, to,
to have those artificial coastlines, we deployed the first one.
And then what we saw was that somehow the system was moving at the same speed as
the plastic. So you can imagine if this is like your, your Pac-Man,
and this is your, your, you know, your,
your catch and is moving at the same speed. It's not going in. Um,
and sometimes it did go in, but it went out again. We've got a video of it.
It was great. Yeah. So, so this is the basic idea. Um,
but it wasn't doing that. So, so, and then, you know, we thought, okay,
that's that's all right, we'll learn from it. We'll try and adjust the systems.
And then literally exactly a year ago, uh, the system broke into two.
And so at the structural failure,
forcing us to tell the whole thing back to land and, um,
go back to the drawing board. So, so we didn't have the best start of this year.
How.
Much time has been lost or how much time has been spent, I should say, um,
in the beginning phase, the initial version that you launched,
this is where you're at now.
So we've been going on at this for since 2013.
So after, yeah,
so basically after five years launching it and seeing it break into two,
that was wasn't the best start of the year I could, could have imagined. Um,
but then yeah, went to the drawing board, um, and you know,
the team really took it well.
And we took those lessons into account,
adjusted the design and relaunch really just a few months later.
So in June and this time we made the system a bit more modular,
so we could try different things to try and adjust the speed, make it go faster,
make it go slower.
And then what we figured was while the system isn't going fast enough,
what if we actually turned the problem into a solution?
What if we turn it around and actually slow it down so that it goes slower than
the plastic, and then what we figured, um, th that, that actually works.
And in October we announced that we're actually catching plastic and really just
last week, the first two shipping containers, full of plastic, where, uh,
Orlando important.
Wow. So it's really recently up and running. Yes. Expected. Now,
how long does it take to accumulate two shipping containers full?
Oh, so that was roughly month, month and a half.
And how big of these shipping containers? 20 foot. So 42 of.
These rooms,
the only thing that's really stopping it from getting more is like the actual
size of the net itself. Yeah.
So, so that's the next step. So now that we can went from zero to one,
we have the basic principle of catching plastic confirmed. Uh,
we now have to make it bigger before we can build a whole fleet of them because,
you know, we've,
we reckon we need maybe 50 or a hundred of them to really clean up path dispatch
of five years. That's the objective.
The whole patch in five years. That's the real objective now,
is that really possible?
If you have enough systems, that's incredible.
Now, where are you at in terms of like trying to get these systems made and
implemented?
Um, so, so the, um, so now we just finished this, this first step with,
um, the system number one, that's how we called it.
And the next step is to develop what we call system two,
which is indeed going to be a bigger version. And, um, it,
the idea is to minimize the amount of festival use that you need for it.
So that comes because boats are really expensive. Um,
yeah, the boat that we have costs roughly 15,000 euros per day to keep running
just one boat. So boat, you don't want boats to, you know, would.
You anticipate that it ever gets to a point where the amount of money that you
can generate from the actual resource of physical plastic can actually pay for
the expert, the whole experiment? I mean, I hope.
So. That's what we want to trial next year with, uh,
by making, uh, products from the catch that we, that we make. And, you know,
the material itself hardly has any value. It's really the story to it.
Straws don't feel guilty. It's a recycled straw.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. Throw that in the ocean again.
Yeah. That's terrible idea. But what would it be?
A very sustainable business model? Just, yeah. Just keep going. Yeah.
What is the, um, what are the products that you're thinking about? Oh, well.
We have a few ideas. We, so it's still kind of under development.
So I think in September we should be ready to launch the first one,
but I think it's going to be things that are jural that don't end up in ways
that you actually, that will retain their value. So it can last for a very,
very long time and, uh, that you actually want and ideally carry around.
So you can talk about with other people. And, um, actually now,
so just last week we were the first plastic on shore. We said, okay,
now we welcome our supporters to actually make, um, well,
I shouldn't call it a reservation, but kind of, um, make a, make a down payment,
um, so that, um, you can be first in line. So if people go to our website,
they can actually put in the 50 bucks and get the right for the first ever
products made from the great Pacific garbage. Gotcha.
So you're just trying to figure out what products will have the most
sustainability, what products people keep for the longest yeah. And.
Things that people want. Right. You don't want some kind of gimmick,
that's just going to be this paperweight.
Flip-flops seemed like an easy one, right? Yeah. Don't they, I mean,
people love to buy flip flops if they bought flip-flops,
especially people that are like a sort of like outdoorsy type folks. Sure.
Appreciate it.
And maybe I have to write these things down. Um.
Flip-flops, that's pretty easy. One. Any other ideas? Um, what else, Jamie,
what else would be a good one? Belts. People like belts, shoes,
any flip-flop shoes, like definitely some Yeezys,
some dope recycled. Yeah. Some recycled sneakers. Like what is foam?
Like the foam that they make running shoes out of.
That's a very specific type of a, yeah. It's not actual plastic. Right.
It's probably made us, it's.
A type of plastic. We, we might be able to, to foam this material as well.
I think we've done tests with.
That. Yeah. Or really turn it into foam. Yeah. Oh,
there's some sort of a process. Yeah. Yeah. I mean,
you could make athletic shoes, that'd be easy, right. People, but they would,
you'd have to have a way to make, to like incentivize people to recycle them.
It would be so ironic for those things wound up, back in the ocean. You know,
there's gotta be a way to do that, just to, you know, like have, like,
if you have your own company,
like drop off points in cities where, when they're done with their stuff,
if it's broken down or it's old, I've used it,
you could throw it into this bin and you will ensure that it gets converted back
into raw materials and utilized again. Right. Yeah. Circular economy. Yeah.
That'd be a great move if you and people would do that. If they,
if you made it easy for them, you know, it's sorta like recycling bins,
they make it easy for them. They'll they'll throw their bottle in there. Sure.
No. Okay. So, um,
you have these two cargo ships or these two cargo containers, uh,
filled with this plastic stuff. Um, what do you do with it now? Yeah.
So now it's going to Europe.
Fortunately there isn't really any useful recycling infrastructure in the U S
so, um, so we set up this, this, um, infrastructure in, in,
in Europe to be able to for sort it and then shred it and then recycle it
and then, um, make those first products out of them. So hopefully, um,
and hopefully with that then generate the cash needed to, to continue, uh,
running the cleanup. But of course now it's still small. Right.
Eventually we should have those number of shipping containers every, you know,
every day.
So do you have like a group of people that are trying to come up with ideas of
what to make out of the plastic?
Yeah. So I have a little team in, uh, inside the ultra cleanup working on that.
And, um, yeah, so they,
I think they said that by September, they should be ready to,
to launch the first product. So.
That's great, man. That's the whole idea behind it's beautiful.
Don't you have a river system too, as well, right? Yes.
So, so that's the other thing, right? So on one hand we need to,
we need to clean up what's what's running in the ocean,
doesn't go away by itself. And, um, yeah, basically the only way to,
to deal with that is to just get out, go out there and clean it up. Um,
but of course then there's this other side of the equation, which is,
there are still huge, huge amounts of plastic flowing into the ocean every day,
mostly from countries in central America. Um,
south Southeast Asia,
where people are kind of at the stage of development or countries are,
are at a stage of development where,
where the people are wealthy enough to consume a lot of things that are wrapped
in plastic. Yet there isn't any waste infrastructure yet to take care of it.
So you literally see people on, on scooters just,
uh, drive to a bridge to dump their municipal waste into the river,
because they're simply the easiest way to get rid of it to your point. You know,
what's easiest people will do.
And so it's not really that people don't care there or
that they, um, are less civilized or something, but it's really a combination.
There's a lot of people and there is no infrastructure that,
that they can make use of. So, so then back in 2015, we were like, okay,
maybe at some point in time, this, this ocean thing will work out, who knows,
but then we're stuck with this problem that there's still so much plastic
flowing in that we would just have to keep going forever.
And that would just be not, not very motivating.
And we want to be this project with a beginning and an end. So, so we're like,
okay, so where's the plastic coming from? And then we figured, you know,
probably rivers rivers are like these, these are trees that carried a Trek from,
from land to sea because, you know,
when it rains plastic washers from streets to Creek to river,
to ocean. And, um,
but then we found out that there's a hundred thousand rivers in the world.
So that's kind of a big amount if you want to do something about it. So,
um, so we started doing measurements and rivers,
and then what we found was that just 1% of rivers are responsible for
80% of the, of the pollution.
So really just a very tiny amount of rivers. If you were to tackle,
those could really address the,
the majority of the plastic going into the ocean. And it's,
it's mostly like these relatively small rivers in, um, in,
in capital cities, like Manila, like Jakarta, like Kuala Lumpur.
We have very high density of people, uh, near the coasts.
That's where most of the leakage, most of the emissions occurs. So,
so since 2015,
we've been kind of as a secret side project been working on, um,
seeing what can we actually develop something to intercept the plastic in,
in those rivers. And, uh, we just launch it month ago,
we call it the interceptor and it's this, uh, yeah,
it is scalable, um, system that that's almost like plug and play.
So you bring it to a river and, um, you install it and it,
it just works. It's fully autonomous solar powered. So.
This is all real, the real plastic that's being pulled.
Out of this river from your machine. Yeah. So this was incredible.
This was the prototype. Um, so this is amazing. This was in Jakarta.
For people we're just listening. We're looking at this thing,
pull enormous amounts of plastic out of this river,
and it's also doing so in there, they're stacking it into these bags. It's,
it's a large physical quantity of stuff.
Oh yeah. And then maybe you can actually pull up the video interceptor too.
And in Malaysia. So we already have two of them in, um,
in real life as we speak. And.
Is it avoid doing anything with fish? How do you avoid, um,
kept accidentally, oh my God. Is that real? Yeah. So.
This is,
this is the clang river in Kuala Lumpur and it's according to our model,
it's like the fifth, most polluting river in the world.
So 1% of all plastic going into the world's oceans is coming from that one
river. And then this.
Is unbelievable how polluted this is, this is crazy. It's.
10 Million kilos per year, roughly. So.
Just, just looking at it, it looks like a wasteland. That's so sad.
Yeah. So, um, so then we, um, so,
so we now have four interceptors. Two of them have already been deployed.
So here's the one, uh, going to, um, to the,
to this clang river and kind of wanted to make it look like a, like a spaceship,
um, just so that people would like it. And so it has this barrier that,
that concentrates the plastic to the mouth of the interceptor,
where you have a conveyor belt that then scoops it out of the water, uh, again,
fully solar and battery powered and then deposits it on to this
moving shadow, um, conveyor, which then distributed across these,
uh, big dumpsters can hold roughly 50 cubic meters of trash. And,
um, yeah, it just works by itself. So it's, um, that's what it does, how.
Much this that's an insane amount of garbage that you're pulling out of there.
When you look at it, visit visually folks, you can watch the video.
What does the name of this video? Jamie?
So people need to find it rivers interceptor. Oh, oh,
two cleaning in Malaysia is the title of the YouTube video.
It's crazy now. And you're not catching any fish in there.
Oh yeah. So, uh, so because this is barriers,
nonpermeable the current just flows underneath it. Um, basically the,
the sea life can pass it actually, at one point we had this giant lizard,
which was probably two meters. We should post that photo.
It was kind of climbing onto the barrier and then have just swim around it. So,
um.
Two meters, really? Yeah. I want a half day. It was what kind of lizard is that?
Uh.
Yeah, for, I don't know the name, but it was some kind.
Of monitor or something monitor that's you're right. Yeah.
Is that you see an image of that? No.
Do you next week? Oh, you haven't posted it before. Oh, okay.
He was looking for it. Yeah. I thought you were saying it was out there. Um,
so it's safer fish. Um,
what about the stuff that doesn't float on the very surface? Right.
So the,
this isn't goes down one meter that what we measured is that really almost all
the plastic is in that top layer. So sure.
It won't be a hundred percent efficient,
but I think it's really about having this pragmatic thing that catches most of
it.
And most importantly, leaves wildlife alone.
Cause everything else can just swim underneath that. Exactly. Yeah.
That's that's great. Um,
and so this plan that you had, uh, when, you know,
it's been six years running,
how much of your daily time is devoted to this? Oh,
I.
Don't think there's much, much free time at all.
It's so I suppose your past year,
I've not had a single free day. Uh, so not a single yeah,
just 9:00 AM to usually, you know,
9:00 PM in the office just it's been a
busy, but I think it was, um, it was worth it.
And I'm looking where we were beginning of the year to where we're now.
Now that you've actually pulled these cargo containers filled with plastic out
of the ocean. That must give you an extreme feeling of satisfaction. Right.
That you've, you've actually made it work like it's moving now.
So I was, I was kind of hoping for that feeling,
but then when you get to that point, you're like, okay, but there's still,
you can really only see the amount of work that's still ahead of you. So,
so it's actually really hard to have enjoy successes
in, in a way. Um, I should probably get better at that.
It's hard. Well, particularly what you're doing,
you have a monumental task in front of you.
And what you're doing is rightly being applauded by so many people,
but I don't know how many people are actually helping you. You,
you have a crazy thing that you're doing.
You're trying to pull the plastic out of the ocean.
When people find out about the great Pacific garbage patch, they get panicky.
They're like, what, how long has this been going on? How do I,
how do I not know about this? Because so few people, I mean,
I would think like maybe 40% of the population understands.
There's a gigantic patch of garbage in the middle of the ocean.
Was discovered 20 years ago. Exactly. 20 years ago.
And still it's there just been growing.
1998, no one had a clue. Nope. And then they went, wait, Hey,
what what's going on here is all this garbage.
And it keeps getting bigger and bigger, right?
Yeah. It's actually quite a good story. This is the sailor called Charles Moore.
It was participating in a sail race between Hawaii and California.
And, um, while others would go further north, he thought, well, let's try and,
uh, cut off this, this piece. And then he was looking at the water and he just,
just saw all that, all that trash. And um, then he went back,
he was shocked about it. And then he decided to,
to take some measurements,
published the results and that kind of popularized that whole concept of the
great Pacific garbage patch. Um.
It's,
it's a weird thing to see when you see drones flying over it and you see the
footage of it. And it's also, it's, it's a lot,
a lot of it is a lot smaller than people think of it because it's broken down by
the ocean. Right? Yeah.
So that's, that's what happens over time is that this,
these larger objects have basically enters the ocean, uh,
due to the working of the waves as well as the sun breaks down to
these smaller, smaller pieces,
which is actually not really a good thing because these smaller pieces are then
easier to ingest for, for fish and other wildlife. So, um, so the smaller,
it gets in a way that the more harmful it gets as well. And fortunately,
what we see is that still at 92% of the plastic is still, um,
non microplastics, so big stuff. But of course,
if we don't clean it up over the next few decades,
all of that big stuff will also become microplastics.
And then we're in a much worse.
State, is the cleanup of Microsoft those microplastics possible,
or is it just something that needs to be sort of rethought out? Well?
So, uh, that was actually one of the positive surprises that we,
that we had this year is that the cleanup system in the patch,
wasn't just catching plastic and not just the big stuff,
it was also catching most of the microplastics. So down to one minute.
Clogged up with all the other stuff, is that what it is?
We're not exactly sure how it was able to do that, but, uh,
we just saw huge amounts of those, those microplastics in the system.
It's probably has to do something with the radiation of the wave.
So you have that big pipe that keeps the system together and because
waves are kind of crashing against it, it reflects waves as well.
And almost like a lens,
it was concentrating those microplastics into one patch in the middle of the
system, which so it was kind of holding them into, into, into the system.
So that was so that's, that was really, um,
we weren't expecting to collect microplastics, but there we were pretty cool.
Um, so now where are you at,
in terms of trying to expand it to a point where you could, you know,
really get this goal of half of the plastic or the ocean in five years? Yeah.
So, so it, it would probably be easier if we had one goal,
but we now set two goals for ourselves. One is the 50% of five year for the,
for the patch. But the other one is that we want to have interceptors,
um, into the 1000 most polluting rivers, the ones that do the 80% in,
um, in the next five years. So we'll be, we'll be pretty busy, really,
really busy. Yes. So if you're not busy enough, yeah. How many.
People are working for your, in your organization.
Now? About a hundred.
And I think really team has been as now better than it's ever been.
So fortunately there is, there's definitely a lot of help. Uh, but, um,
but we're still recruiting, uh, quite, I think not, not are 20,
30 people coming off a year. So, um, it's definitely,
there is a lot of work to do. And what is this ride been like for you from.